# The things that should make us mad

:date: 2019-08-01T12:00:00-04:00
:tags: Digital Rights

As anybody who regularly watches the news knows, there is no shortage of reasons to be mad. Yet
precisely because of this sheer amount of information<sup>1</sup>, it's also easy to live in an
anesthetized status, in which all the horrible things that happen in the world far away from home
look like background noise. Because of this, sometimes we need a trigger - we need to pick a
particular thing to be mad at.

This week I found mine, and I am enraged.

GitHub.com, the largest code sharing platform in the world and, besides, home to this humble blog
and virtually all my open source work, [started blocking users from Iran and other
countries](https://twitter.com/Hamed/status/1154268514074660864) somewhere around July 25th,
2019,  As Nat Friedman, GitHub's CEO, confirmed some days later, the company was not offered
["the option to give anyone advance notice of
restrictions"](https://twitter.com/natfriedman/status/1155311124687945728), which prevented the
banned developers to take actions to protect their code, such us making their repositories
public. The reasons for these bans are explained [on this GitHub
page](https://help.github.com/en/articles/github-and-trade-controls), and can be summarized in
this sentence:

> U.S. trade control laws restrict what GitHub.com services can be made available to users in
certain countries and territories.

Therefore, under current USA trade law, GitHub is forced to restrict access to their services in
a bunch of countries, somewhat overlapping with what George W. Bush infamously called the "Axis
of Evil". According to the [Treasury Departmentâ€™s Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC)
website](https://www.wm.edu/offices/techtransfer/ExportControls/Regulations/OFAC/index.php):

> Currently, sanctioned countries include the Balkans, Belarus, Burma, Cote D'Ivoire (Ivory
Coast), Cuba, Democratic Republic of Congo, Iran, Iraq, Liberia, North Korea, Sudan, Syria, and
Zimbabwe.

Without trying to get a 100 % understanding about the reach of these sanctions, it's anyway
important to note that [it's a complex
matter](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/United_States_sanctions):

> Combined, the Treasury Department, the Commerce Department and the State Department list
embargoes against 30 countries or territories

I leave this bit of information here before I get emotional about Iran in particular later on. Do
not forget that there are more countries affected.

![GitHub ban
note](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/1995parham/github-do-not-ban-us/master/message.png)

_However_, even though these restrictions should be clearly applied according to location and not
nationality, [the situation is much worse](https://github.com/1995parham/github-do-not-ban-us)
(emphasis mine):

> GitHub decided to take one step further and ban every user that used Iran's IP address
**somewhere their history no matter where she/he is living**

USA applying economic sanctions to countries is by no means a new phenomenon. For example, the
[Iran and Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA)](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Iran_and_Libya_Sanctions_Act)
dates from 1996.

On the other hand, we could write a million words about how suspiciously selective the USA are
when picking which countries to sanction, and another ten million words about their foreign
policy in general, [supporting dictatorships and mass killings all around the
world](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Operation_Condor) and destabilizing governments that they
don't like. Without doubt these policies brought to where we are now. Thus, by speaking about
this particular topic (the GitHub bans), I am no way trying to minimize all the harm that the USA
has inflicted to the world, now or in the past.

I am picking my reason to be mad.

## Freedom of choice

In the second quarter of 2019, the [5 biggest companies by market
capitalization](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/List_of_public_corporations_by_market_capitalization#/2019)
are USA tech companies: Microsoft (owner of GitHub), Amazon.com, Apple Inc., Alphabet Inc.
(parent company of Google) and Facebook. Only one of them manufactures objects you can touch, the
rest being software, services, and micro-targeted advertising.

The fact that all the companies that dictate how the Western world interacts with technology are
based in the USA means that we are forced to abide by their rules of [how the female body is
portrayed](https://www.theverge.com/2018/4/24/17275114/facebook-community-guidelines-nipples-nudity),
[how people of color are (not) taken into account when building user-facing
products](https://www.theverge.com/2018/1/12/16882408/google-racist-gorillas-photo-recognition-algorithm-ai),
and many more subtleties.

Therefore, the consequences of this dominance of USA-based companies are far reaching, but
[trying to live without them is so difficult that it's not even
funny](https://gizmodo.com/i-cut-the-big-five-tech-giants-from-my-life-it-was-hel-1831304194),
and the reasons for that are related to how tech companies make use of cloud services. For
example, Spotify S. A. is a Swedish company but [they store their data in Google Cloud
Storage](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/gcp/spotify-chooses-google-cloud-platform-to-power-data-infrastructure),
and so the theoretical advantages of being in the European Union vanish.

The five big tech giants, and with them the USA and their morals, have effectively monopolized
the Internet.

## Getting mad

I first started getting mad at the USA economic sanctions during my first year as [Associate
Professor of several Python subjects at IE School of Human Sciences and
Technology](https://www.ie.edu/school-human-sciences-technology/we-are-hst/people/faculty/juan-luis-cano-rodriguez/).
I am lucky to have about 55 students from literally everywhere in the world and to be about the
same age than my students, which makes the interaction with them extremely enriching and eye
opening.

As part of the course, I encourage my students to participate in Kaggle competitions, which
involve complex data science and machine learning problems in a healthy and competitive
environment. At some point though, some event that I can't remember (not sure if the [Rohingya
genocide in Myanmar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rohingya_genocide), the [2017 Venezuelan
Constitutional crisis](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/2017_Venezuelan_constitutional_crisis) or the
[2017-2018 Iranian protests](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/2017%E2%80%9318_Iranian_protests))
triggered me and made me think that, Kaggle being in the USA, there was probably some
restrictions to the "Axis of Evil".

[And I was right](https://www.kaggle.com/terms):

> Competitions are open to residents of the United States and worldwide, except if you are a
resident of Crimea, Cuba, Iran, Syria, North Korea, Sudan, or any other place prohibited by law
you may not enter any Competition.

I had students from Iran at the time, and reading this sentence made me furious. I tried looking
into another platforms and found DrivenData, whose slogan is "Data science competitions to build
a better world" and has a focus on social impact and sustainable development goals, but it turns
out it was [subject to the same
restrictions](https://www.drivendata.org/termsofuse/#governing-law-and-jurisdiction):

> We make no claims that the Website or any of its content is accessible or appropriate outside
of the United States. Access to the Website may not be legal by certain persons or in certain
countries.

At this point I gave up and offered an apology to my students. Fortunately, _according to the
text_, nobody should have problems using the platforms from Spain, which is where the class take
place, so I called it a day.

However, fast forward to 2019, and now there's a real possibility that some of my students won't
be able to access [the materials of my
courses](https://github.com/Juanlu001/ie-mbd-advanced-python/) if they ever visited any of the
sanctioned countries _in the past_ just because, at the time of writing, they are hosted on
GitHub. Also, [GitLab.com is not an option because it uses Google
Cloud](https://twitter.com/Hamed/status/1154500430317182976). [Neither are Bitbucket nor
SourceForge](https://twitter.com/Hamed/status/1154500430317182976).

You guessed it right: I am mad as hell.

## We need an alternative

If you have been reading carefully, you will have noticed that the GitHub restrictions affect
"access to private repository services and paid services", so in theory nobody should have
problems to access these materials. I am not over dramatizing in bad faith, but to get my point
across: what if I ask them to create a private repository for an assignment? What if they want to
use the paid services for any reason? What if the [Orange in
Chief](https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/) declares war to Iran in a series of angry tweets and
the sanctions get worse?<sup>2</sup>

For the time being, I will do everything I can with the time and resources I have (one month) to
avoid putting any of my future students in a situation where they are at disadvantage with
respect to their colleagues. This might or might not involve making the materials available in a
self-hosted git web UI (GitLab, Gitea) and making it useable enough so that all the development
can happen there. Or I can use platforms like [Codeberg](https://codeberg.org/), a hosted Gitea
service backed by [a non-profit organisation based in
Germany](https://codeberg.org/codeberg/org/src/branch/master/Imprint.md) that promoted themselves
among all this crisis. And of course, whatever I build in the future, I will be careful to
consider [non-USA cloud providers as well](https://fuga.cloud/).

So, now that I told you what *I* am going to do, I think it's important to think about what *we*,
the people that can't change the course of the USA foreign policy (either because we are not
decision makers or because we can't even vote the current them out) are going to do. We *need* to
have a deep conversation about the alternatives to the current situation.

Some people will happily state that we **just** have to host our own GitLab/Gitea/whatever, but
please bear with me if I'm wary of [the
J-word](https://saynotostigma.com/2015/09/the-j-word-just-think-about-it/). Also, without
seamless model for [nomadic
identities](https://medium.com/@tamanning/nomadic-identity-brought-to-you-by-hubzilla-67eadce13c3b)
that do not make me give my email and password to an unbounded number of small, volunteer-run
code sharing websites, not to mention being able to [easily migrate my data to another instance
in case one goes down](https://github.com/tootsuite/mastodon/issues/177) or a way to aggregate
the costs in managing email servers (read: SPAM), storage, security upgrades in a way that they
devolve upon all these atomized efforts, I argue that this approach will never be a real
alternative, let alone compete with the status quo.

Some other people have declared that Blockchain and distributed ledger technologies will fix this
issue - I can't help rolling my eyes into another dimension when I hear this kind of
overstatements, but perhaps it's the reality and I just have to accept it.

Perhaps EU-based, non-profit organisations like Codeberg are the answers, but of course being
based in the EU is "good enough" to me only because it _seems_ better than the USA in this
respect and because I have my own biases (disclaimer: I'm a EU citizen). Therefore, perhaps being
attached to a particular legislation is not good enough, which brings us back to the Blockchain,
or at least should make us consider how do we enable groups of people to create platforms that
are big enough so they don't incur in a massive overhead of administrative costs and that can be
set up and accessed anywhere. Also, [would a cooperative be a better solution than a
non-profit](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Cooperative)?

I have a lot of questions and very few answers, but if you stayed this long I hope I got you
thinking about what to do. It's already bad enough that [some people can't go back to their home
countries and then return to where they make a
living](https://www.acslaw.org/expertforum/trumps-travel-ban-two-years-later/), so we owe our
friends, our students, our colleagues, a better alternative.

Are you mad already? Then let's do something about it.

---

<sup>1</sup>`Data < Information < Knowledge < Wisdom`
<sup>2</sup>Needless to say, being at war makes all the other problems pale in comparison.
